docs/gui_inference.md, before:

# Inference GUI

The inference GUI provides a desktop workflow for running deconvolution on single mixed patterns or
batch folders while staying fully compatible with the existing CLI pipeline. It loads the same YAML
configuration, applies 16-bit preprocessing rules, and writes canonical 16-bit PNG outputs along
with run manifests and optional metrics exports.

## Launching the GUI

Install dependencies (including PySide6):

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Run the GUI:

```bash
python3 scripts/run_inference_gui.py
```

## Configuration precedence

The GUI loads a YAML configuration (default: `configs/infer_default.yaml`) and applies UI overrides
on top of it. Precedence is:

1. CLI arguments (when using the CLI scripts)
2. GUI overrides
3. YAML defaults

The GUI does **not** modify the YAML file; it only applies overrides in memory for the current run.

## Inputs

### Mixed pattern input (C)

- **Single image mode** (default): select one mixed pattern image.
- **Batch mode**: select a folder plus a glob pattern (e.g., `*.png`). Toggle recursion to scan
  nested folders.

Supported formats: PNG/TIFF/BMP/JPG. Non-16-bit inputs are scaled to a canonical 16-bit range on
load.

### Optional ground truth (A, B)

Provide GT inputs to compute metrics for `A_hat` vs `A` and `B_hat` vs `B`.

- **Single image mode**: choose explicit A/B files.
- **Batch mode**: choose A/B folders plus a glob pattern. Matching uses the sample ID derived from
  file stems (suffixes like `_A`, `_B`, and `_C` are stripped automatically).

## Outputs

The GUI writes outputs to the configured output directory:

```
<out_dir>/
  A/           # predicted A_hat (16-bit PNG)
  B/           # predicted B_hat (16-bit PNG)
  C_hat/       # reconstructed C (optional, 16-bit PNG)
  run_manifest.json
  metrics.csv  # only when GT is provided
  metrics.json # only when GT is provided
```

### run_manifest.json

The manifest captures:

- effective configuration (YAML + GUI overrides)
- checkpoint path and device
- timing, processed/failed counts, and output counts
- git commit hash (when available)

### Metrics exports

If GT is supplied, the GUI computes per-image metrics and writes:

- `metrics.csv`: per-sample metrics (`a_l1`, `a_l2`, `a_psnr`, `a_ssim`, `b_l1`, `b_l2`, `b_psnr`,
  `b_ssim`)
- `metrics.json`: summary averages and the per-sample table

## Visualization

The viewer uses a linked 2×2 grid:

- **Top-left**: input C
- **Top-right**: predicted A_hat
- **Bottom-left**: predicted B_hat
- **Bottom-right**: diagnostics (metrics + diff map when GT exists)

Use the percentile sliders to adjust contrast for quick inspection. Pixel readouts show the current
cursor position and value. All preview images are rendered as 8-bit for speed while the underlying
data retains 16-bit fidelity.

## Logging

The GUI uses the shared project logging utilities and exposes a log panel with:

- level filtering (DEBUG/INFO/WARNING/ERROR)
- copy, save, and clear actions
- full tracebacks for exceptions

## Notes and tips

- Model loading is lazy and cached across runs. Switching checkpoints triggers a reload, while
  repeated runs with the same settings reuse the cached model.
- Use the **Cancel** button to stop long batch runs; partial outputs and manifests are still saved.

For CLI usage, see `docs/training_inference.md`.

Commit message:

fix: align inference metrics preprocessing

docs/gui_inference.md, after:

# Inference GUI

The inference GUI provides a desktop workflow for running deconvolution on single mixed patterns or
batch folders while staying fully compatible with the existing CLI pipeline. It loads the same YAML
configuration, applies 16-bit preprocessing rules, and writes canonical 16-bit PNG outputs along
with run manifests and optional metrics exports.

## Launching the GUI

Install dependencies (including PySide6):

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Run the GUI:

```bash
python3 scripts/run_inference_gui.py
```

## Configuration precedence

The GUI loads a YAML configuration (default: `configs/infer_default.yaml`) and applies UI overrides
on top of it. Precedence is:

1. CLI arguments (when using the CLI scripts)
2. GUI overrides
3. YAML defaults

The GUI does **not** modify the YAML file; it only applies overrides in memory for the current run.

## Inputs

### Mixed pattern input (C)

- **Single image mode** (default): select one mixed pattern image.
- **Batch mode**: select a folder plus a glob pattern (e.g., `*.png`). Toggle recursion to scan
  nested folders.

Supported formats: PNG/TIFF/BMP/JPG. Non-16-bit inputs are scaled to a canonical 16-bit range on
load.

### Optional ground truth (A, B)

Provide GT inputs to compute metrics for `A_hat` vs `A` and `B_hat` vs `B`.

- **Single image mode**: choose explicit A/B files.
- **Batch mode**: choose A/B folders plus a glob pattern. Matching uses the sample ID derived from
  file stems (suffixes like `_A`, `_B`, and `_C` are stripped automatically).

### Preprocessing alignment for metrics

When GT is provided, the GUI applies the same preprocessing pipeline (crop/mask/normalize) that was
used for the mixed inputs before computing metrics. This keeps shapes and intensity ranges aligned
with model predictions. If cropping is enabled, the GT crop indices match the input crop used for
each sample.

## Outputs

The GUI writes outputs to the configured output directory:

```
<out_dir>/
  A/           # predicted A_hat (16-bit PNG)
  B/           # predicted B_hat (16-bit PNG)
  C_hat/       # reconstructed C (optional, 16-bit PNG)
  run_manifest.json
  metrics.csv  # only when GT is provided
  metrics.json # only when GT is provided
```

### run_manifest.json

The manifest captures:

- effective configuration (YAML + GUI overrides)
- checkpoint path and device
- timing, processed/failed counts, and output counts
- git commit hash (when available)

### Metrics exports

If GT is supplied, the GUI computes per-image metrics and writes:

- `metrics.csv`: per-sample metrics (`a_l1`, `a_l2`, `a_psnr`, `a_ssim`, `b_l1`, `b_l2`, `b_psnr`,
  `b_ssim`)
- `metrics.json`: summary averages and the per-sample table

In batch runs, it is valid for some samples to have only A or only B ground truth. The CSV export
automatically unions available metric keys across samples so partial GT coverage does not break the
export.

## Visualization

The viewer uses a linked 2×2 grid:

- **Top-left**: input C
- **Top-right**: predicted A_hat
- **Bottom-left**: predicted B_hat
- **Bottom-right**: diagnostics (metrics + diff map when GT exists)

Use the percentile sliders to adjust contrast for quick inspection. Pixel readouts show the current
cursor position and value. All preview images are rendered as 8-bit for speed while the underlying
data retains 16-bit fidelity.

## Logging

The GUI uses the shared project logging utilities and exposes a log panel with:

- level filtering (DEBUG/INFO/WARNING/ERROR)
- copy, save, and clear actions
- full tracebacks for exceptions

## Notes and tips

- Model loading is lazy and cached across runs. Switching checkpoints triggers a reload, while
  repeated runs with the same settings reuse the cached model.
- Use the **Cancel** button to stop long batch runs; partial outputs and manifests are still saved.
- If you enable cropping in `data.preprocess`, provide GT images with the original uncropped sizes
  so the GUI can apply identical crop indices before computing metrics.

For CLI usage, see `docs/training_inference.md`.
